(740 ILCS 14/1) 
    Sec. 1. Short title. This Act may be cited as the Biometric Information Privacy Act.
(Source: P.A. 95-994, eff. 10-3-08.)                                                
    (740 ILCS 14/5) 
    Sec. 5. Legislative findings; intent.   The General Assembly finds all of the following:    (a) The use of biometrics is growing in the business and security screening sectors and appears to promise streamlined financial transactions and security screenings.    (b)  Major national corporations have selected the City of Chicago and other locations in this State as pilot testing sites for new applications of biometric-facilitated financial transactions, including finger-scan technologies at grocery stores, gas stations, and school cafeterias.    (c)  Biometrics are unlike other unique identifiers that are used to access finances or other sensitive information.  For example, social security numbers, when compromised, can be changed.  Biometrics, however, are biologically unique to the individual; therefore, once compromised, the individual has no recourse, is at heightened risk for identity theft, and is likely to withdraw from biometric-facilitated transactions.    (d) An overwhelming majority of members of the public are weary of the use of biometrics when such information is tied to finances and other personal information.    (e)  Despite limited State law regulating the collection, use, safeguarding, and storage of biometrics, many members of the public are deterred from partaking in biometric identifier-facilitated transactions.    (f)  The full ramifications of biometric technology are not fully known.    (g)  The public welfare, security, and safety will be served by regulating the collection, use, safeguarding, handling, storage, retention, and destruction of biometric identifiers and information.

(Source: P.A. 95-994, eff. 10-3-08.)                                                
    (740 ILCS 14/10)     Sec. 10. Definitions. In this Act:    "Biometric identifier" means a retina or iris scan, fingerprint, voiceprint, or scan of hand or face geometry. Biometric identifiers do not include writing samples, written signatures, photographs, human biological samples used for valid scientific testing or screening, demographic data, tattoo descriptions, or physical descriptions such as height, weight, hair color, or eye color. Biometric identifiers do not include donated organs, tissues, or parts as defined in the Illinois Anatomical Gift Act or blood or serum stored on behalf of recipients or potential recipients of living or cadaveric transplants and obtained or stored by a federally designated organ procurement agency. Biometric identifiers do not include biological materials regulated under the Genetic Information Privacy Act. Biometric identifiers do not include information captured from a patient in a health care setting or information collected, used, or stored for health care treatment, payment, or operations under the federal Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996. Biometric identifiers do not include an X-ray, roentgen process, computed tomography, MRI, PET scan, mammography, or other image or film of the human anatomy used to diagnose, prognose, or treat an illness or other medical condition or to further validate scientific testing or screening.    "Biometric information" means any information, regardless of how it is captured, converted, stored, or shared, based on an individual's biometric identifier used to identify an individual. Biometric information does not include information derived from items or procedures excluded under the definition of biometric identifiers.    "Confidential and sensitive information" means personal information that can be used to uniquely identify an individual or an individual's account or property. Examples of confidential and sensitive information include, but are not limited to, a genetic marker, genetic testing information, a unique identifier number to locate an account or property, an account number, a PIN number, a pass code, a driver's license number, or a social security number.    "Electronic signature" means an electronic sound, symbol, or process attached to or logically associated with a record and executed or adopted by a person with the intent to sign the record.    "Private entity" means any individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, association, or other group, however organized. A private entity does not include a State or local government agency. A private entity does not include any court of Illinois, a clerk of the court, or a judge or justice thereof.    "Written release" means informed written consent, electronic signature, or, in the context of employment, a release executed by an employee as a condition of employment.(Source: P.A. 103-769, eff. 8-2-24.)                                                
    (740 ILCS 14/15) 
    Sec. 15. Retention; collection; disclosure; destruction.     (a) A private entity in possession of biometric identifiers or biometric information must develop a written policy, made available to the public, establishing a retention schedule and guidelines for permanently destroying biometric identifiers and biometric information when the initial purpose for collecting or obtaining such identifiers or information has been satisfied or within 3 years of the individual's last interaction with the private entity, whichever occurs first.  Absent a valid warrant or subpoena issued by a court of competent jurisdiction, a private entity in possession of biometric identifiers or biometric information must comply with its established retention schedule and destruction guidelines.    (b) No private entity may collect, capture, purchase, receive through trade, or otherwise obtain a person's or a customer's biometric identifier or biometric information, unless it first:        (1) informs the subject or the subject's legally     authorized representative in writing that a biometric identifier or biometric information is being collected or stored;        (2) informs the subject or the subject's legally     authorized representative in writing of the specific purpose and length of term for which a biometric identifier or biometric information is being collected, stored, and used; and        (3) receives a written release executed by the     subject of the biometric identifier or biometric information or the subject's legally authorized representative.      (c) No private entity in possession of a biometric identifier or biometric information may sell, lease, trade, or otherwise profit from a person's or a customer's biometric identifier or biometric information.    (d) No private entity in possession of a biometric identifier or biometric information may disclose, redisclose, or otherwise disseminate a person's or a customer's biometric identifier or biometric information
unless:        (1) the subject of the biometric identifier or     biometric information or the subject's legally authorized representative consents to the disclosure or redisclosure;        (2) the disclosure or redisclosure completes a     financial transaction requested or authorized by the subject of the biometric identifier or the biometric information or the subject's legally authorized representative;        (3) the disclosure or redisclosure is required by     State or federal law or municipal ordinance; or        (4) the disclosure is required pursuant to a valid     warrant or subpoena issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.     (e) A private entity in possession of a biometric identifier or biometric information shall:        (1) store, transmit, and protect from disclosure all     biometric identifiers and biometric information using the reasonable standard of care within the private entity's industry; and         (2)  store, transmit, and protect from disclosure all     biometric identifiers and biometric information in a manner that is the same as or more protective than the manner in which the private entity stores, transmits, and protects other confidential and sensitive information.  
(Source: P.A. 95-994, eff. 10-3-08.)                                                
    (740 ILCS 14/20)     Sec. 20. Right of action.     (a) Any person aggrieved by a violation of this Act shall have a right of action in a State circuit court or as a supplemental claim in federal district court against an offending party. A prevailing party may recover for each violation:        (1) against a private entity that negligently     violates a provision of this Act, liquidated damages of $1,000 or actual damages, whichever is greater;        (2) against a private entity that intentionally or     recklessly violates a provision of this Act, liquidated damages of $5,000 or actual damages, whichever is greater;        (3) reasonable attorneys' fees and costs, including     expert witness fees and other litigation expenses; and        (4) other relief, including an injunction, as the     State or federal court may deem appropriate.    (b) For purposes of subsection (b) of Section 15, a private entity that, in more than one instance, collects, captures, purchases, receives through trade, or otherwise obtains the same biometric identifier or biometric information from the same person using the same method of collection in violation of subsection (b) of Section 15 has committed a single violation of subsection (b) of Section 15 for which the aggrieved person is entitled to, at most, one recovery under this Section.    (c) For purposes of subsection (d) of Section 15, a private entity that, in more than one instance, discloses, rediscloses, or otherwise disseminates the same biometric identifier or biometric information from the same person to the same recipient using the same method of collection in violation of subsection (d) of Section 15 has committed a single violation of subsection (d) of Section 15 for which the aggrieved person is entitled to, at most, one recovery under this Section regardless of the number of times the private entity disclosed, redisclosed, or otherwise disseminated the same biometric identifier or biometric information of the same person to the same recipient. (Source: P.A. 103-769, eff. 8-2-24.)                                                
    (740 ILCS 14/25) 
    Sec. 25. Construction.     (a) Nothing in this Act shall be construed to impact the admission or discovery of biometric identifiers and biometric information in any action of any kind in any court, or before any tribunal, board, agency, or person.    (b) Nothing in this Act shall be construed to conflict with the X-Ray Retention Act, the federal Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 and the rules promulgated under either Act.    (c) Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to apply in any manner to a financial institution or an affiliate of a financial institution that is subject to Title V of the federal Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act of 1999 and the rules promulgated thereunder.    (d) Nothing in this Act shall be construed to conflict with the Private Detective, Private Alarm, Private Security, Fingerprint Vendor, and Locksmith Act of 2004 and the rules promulgated thereunder.    (e) Nothing in this Act shall be construed to apply to a contractor, subcontractor, or agent of a State agency or local unit of government when working for that State agency or local unit of government.
(Source: P.A. 95-994, eff. 10-3-08.)                                                
    (740 ILCS 14/30) 
		    Sec. 30. (Repealed). 
		(Source: P.A. 95-994, eff. 10-3-08. Repealed internally, eff. 1-1-09.)                                                
    (740 ILCS 14/99) 
    Sec. 99. Effective date. This Act takes effect upon becoming law.
(Source: P.A. 95-994, eff. 10-3-08.)